SElinux Installation and Configuration

On App Server 2 within the Stratos Datacenter:

Install the required SELinux packages
Permanently disable SELinux (for now)
No reboot needed immediately; it will be disabled after the planned maintenance reboot tonight

What is SELinux?
SELinux (Security-Enhanced Linux) is a security module built into the Linux kernel that enforces Mandatory Access Control (MAC).
Instead of relying only on standard Linux permissions (owner, group, others), SELinux uses policies to decide which processes can access which files, sockets, and other system resourceseven if standard permissions would normally allow it.

This adds a second layer of defense against misconfigurations or exploited services.

Steps Taken to Carry Out the Task
1. Checked the OS Version
I confirmed the server’s operating system to determine which package manager to use.

cat /etc/*release
Press enter or click to view image in full size

2. Installed the Required SELinux Packages using yum
The OS showed CentOS, so I used yum for installing packages. I sucessfully installed the packages

sudo yum install selinux-policy selinux-policy-targeted policycoreutils
selinux-policy → The base rule set for SELinux
selinux-policy-targeted → Default policy that targets high-risk services
policycoreutils → Command-line tools to manage SELinux
Press enter or click to view image in full size

️3. Permanently Disabled SELinux
Opened the SELinux configuration file:
sudo vi /etc/selinux/config

#Once the file was opened, Changed
SELINUX=enforcing

#to 

SELINUX=disabled
Press enter or click to view image in full size

Saved and exited the file in vi using (:wq).
4️. Verified the Config Change
grep SELINUX= /etc/selinux/config
Output:

Press enter or click to view image in full size

This confirms that after the next reboot, SELinux will be disabled.

Key Takeaways
SELinux adds a policy-based security layer that works alongside traditional Linux permissions
Permanent changes to SELinux state require editing /etc/selinux/config
