 Install Ansible

Install Ansible v4.8.0 on the jump host using pip3 and make sure it’s available for all users.

What is Ansible & What Does It Do?
Ansible is an open-source automation tool used for:

What is Ansible?
Ansible is an open-source automation tool for:

Configuration management: set up servers the same way every time.
Application deployment: install and update software easily.
Task automation: run commands on many servers at once.
Orchestration: coordinate multiple machines and services in complex setups.
It uses playbooks (written in YAML) to define what needs to be done.

It’s agentless which means no extra software needed on the target machines, just SSH access.

It’s popular because it’s simple, readable, and works on many systems.

Task Solution:
Checked OS and pip3 availability on Jumphost
cat /etc/*release # to check OS
python3 --version #Check if Python 3 is installed
pip3 --version # to check if pip3 is installed
Ansible runs on Python, so the first step is to make sure Python 3 is available.
pip3 is Python’s package manager — without it, we can’t install Ansible from PyPI.
Output:

Press enter or click to view image in full size

2. Installed Ansible v4.8.0

Specified the version to lock it in case there is a newer version than the one specified in the task.

sudo pip3 install ansible==4.8.0\
Output:

Press enter or click to view image in full size

3. After installation was complete, verified installation

ansible --version
When I checked my Ansible version with ansible --version, I didn’t see “4.8.0”, instead, I saw “core 2.11.12.” . This is because Ansible’s version command shows the core engine version, not the full package version. To check the full release, I had to run pip3 show ansible.

Output:

Press enter or click to view image in full size

4. Ensured Ansible was available to global users.

Since Ansible was installed with sudo pip3, It should be in /usr/local/bin and available to all users.
I checked with the command which ansible to confirm
Press enter or click to view image in full size

It’s in a directory (/usr/local/bin) that’s part of the global $PATH, so any user on the jump host can run ansible without extra setup.
